---
layout: page
title: Errata, Potential Mistakes, & Retcons
goat_counter: "bysoundalone" 
---


* [The boat shoulda sunk faster in the first chapter](#the-boat-shoulda-sunk-faster-in-the-first-chapter)
* [The underwater docking bay should be pressurized, like an upside-down cup](the-underwater-docking-bay-should-be-pressurized-like-an-upside-down-cup)

### The boat shoulda sunk faster in the first chapter
There's a pretty strong argument to me made that in the first chapter, after being rammed, the _Prospect_ would have been damaged so badly that it would have flooded quickly and sunk in a general atmosphere of emergency and alarm. A few readers have indicated to me that they believe a quick sinking would have been more realistic (and possibly that they would have preferred the dramatic action it would have brought to the forefront of the book).

Let me lay out three reasons why the slow-leak sinking as I wrote it in the first chapter is at least plausible (if not probable):

	1. The _Prospect_ has huge saddle tanks on its sides that are its main ballast tanks. (See details for the _Tang_ --- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USS_Tang_(SS-563) --- on which the hull of the _Prospect_ was based.) Conceivably the saddle tanks could have / would have absorbed most of the energy of the ramming, and sustained significant damage, but it would have been _outside_ the pressure hull. Some, but much less, damage could have resulted to the pressure hull yielding the cracked rather than breached situation the _Prospect_ faces in the first chapter, and the accompanying slow leaks. (Submarine pressure hulls were and still are made of the strongest steels known to material science.) The result is a badly damaged main ballast tank, and modestly damaged pressure hull that slowly puts the boat into the position of not being able to gain the surface.
	2. Real (war) submarines have many small compartments --- which is what you want if you anticipate a situation where you might take damage (like war). Small compartments allow you to isolate leaks and repair them in the compartment. However on a cargo submarine, one could imagine designers assuming the boat would generally _not_ be taking damage, and since the priority is cargo and all the weapons systems are unecessary, a single large compartment might be designed into the boat, as is the case in the _Prospect_. A small compartment with a leak will very quickly fill with water no matter how large a leak there is, but a large space with a leak will take much longer for a leak to register.
	3. Real (war) submarines also have a crew complement of many dozens at the least --- all necessary for fighting a war boat. On a war sub, there are _always_ a number of people throughout the boat. The _Prospect_, being a cargo submarine, has a crew complement of half a dozen or so. Like a surface cargo vessel, there are many parts of the boat that would not generally have anyone passing through them on a regular basis. This is another reason a slow leak may take a while to be idenfied.

Is this a retcon? Yes, it is. I wanted to open the book by stealing this bit of drama from many (many) Deadliest Catch episodes and a few Patrick O'Brian stories where it slowly dawns on a captain that the ship has a leak and taking on water is affecting its handling. This, followed by a panic as they run around trying to figure out where the leak is coming from. I just love that slow-burn build-up to a desperate repair! The idea that this situation would be much less likely on a submarine than on a surface ship honestly had not occurred to me while I was writing. However, point number one above is pretty strong --- if you can accept that the repairs to the saddle tank were carried out "off-camera," as it were. (I think I forgot to address this at the depot --- they actually needed divers to repair the boat. This will be addressed if I do a 2nd edition at some point.)

### The underwater docking bay should be pressurized, like an upside-down cup
If you have your middle-school physics burned into the back of your brain somewhere (I certainly do), then you might go into the depot section remembering the dry paper in the upside down cup submerged in a bucket of water, and believe that the depot dock should be pressurized. However, this notion confuses saturation diving with submersibles/submarines. In saturation diving, people are put inside the upside down cup (diving bell, habitat, what have you). As the unit goes deeper, the pressure inside increases potentially to the equivalent of many atmospheres. If you descend slowly enough, your body adapts to the pressure and then you can live at that pressure. The chief result is you can have that sweetest element of underwater adventure stories: the moon pool! (See [Sealab](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SEALAB).) And, OK, maybe some people appreciate that you don't need a massive steel pressure hull surrounding you to be at depth in the ocean. Trust me, if I could have crammed a moon pool into my book somewhere, it would be there.

But submarines don't work like that. They are kept at (more or less) one atmosphere of pressure, so the people inside don't have to go through compression and decompression processes. (As you can imagine, it's not always precisely the same pressure inside the sub as outside --- things change while you're down there --- so sometimes the hatch opens with a serious pop!) This means if you opened a hole in a submarine (like a moon pool) the water would flood in because the inside of the sub it at significantly less pressure than the ocean around it when submerged.

To get back to the underwater submarine dock: being about 30 meters down, if you pressurized it to match the water surrounded, it would be at about 3 atmospheres, compared to the 1 atmosphere of a docked sub --- the sub wouldn't be able to open the hatch. Another, more minor point, is that the depot wants to be able to maintain operations on the surface as well. If the depot were pressurized, it would require an airlock (and decompression process) to leave the depot on the surface.

So, at least until some physicist tears apart the specifics, the depot is correct in the mechanics for how you would build an underwater submarine dock.


